Update Administration Guide - Monitoring (#20)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: modules/administration/pages/monitoring.adoc

[[monitoring]]
= Monitoring with Prometheus and Grafana

You can monitor your {productname} environment using Prometheus and Grafana.
{productname} Server and Proxy are able to provide self-health metrics, and you can also install and manage a number of Prometheus exporters on Salt clients.

Prometheus and Grafana packages are included in the {productname} Client Tools for {sle}{nbsp}12, {sle}{nbsp}15 and openSUSE 15.x.

You need to install Prometheus and Grafana on a machine separate from the {productname} Server.
We recommend you use a managed Salt client as your monitoring server. 

[NOTE]
====
Prometheus fetches metrics using a pull mechanism, so the server must be able to establish TCP connections to monitored clients. Clients must have the corresponding open ports and be reachable over the network.
====

> == About Prometheus and Grafana

Author: I have ditched the "About". However, I would still keep "Prometheus and Grafana" as we are introducing our monitoring solution, not so much Prometheus and Grafana as independent components.

Grafana is commonly used together with Prometheus, but also supports other data sources such as ElasticSearch, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Influx DB.
For more information about Grafana, see https://grafana.com/docs/.

== Setup the Monitoring Server

=== Install Prometheus

If your monitoring server is a {productname} Salt client, you can install the Prometheus package using the {productname} {webui}.
Otherwise you can download and install the package on your monitoring server manually.

.Procedure: Installing Prometheus via {productname} {webui}

. In the {productname} {webui}, open the details page of the system where Prometheus is to be installed, and navigate to the [guimenu]``Formulas`` tab.
. Check the [guimenu]``Prometheus`` checkbox to enable  monitoring formulas, and click btn:[Save].
. Navigate to the ``Prometheus`` tab in the top menu.
. In the ``{productname} Server`` section, enter valid {productname} API credentials. Make sure that the credentials you have entered allow access to the set of systems you want to monitor.
. Customize any other configuration options according to your needs. 
. Click btn:[Save Formula].
. Apply the highstate.

> . Once the highstate completes, check that the Prometheus interface is loading correctly. In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Prometheus is installed, on port 9090 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:9090``).

Author: I would not call it 'The monitoring page' as this is the Prometheus UI (mostly text-oriented), not a single pane of glass for monitoring, or even a graphical UI like Grafana.

> . Once the highstate completes, check that the Prometheus interface is loading correctly. In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Prometheus is installed, on port 9090 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:9090``).

Reviewer: I just noticed the future tense here, too. Probably should be something like "The Prometheus interface page loads if the installation is successful".

systemctl enable --now prometheus
----
. Check that the Prometheus interface is loading correctly.
In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Prometheus is installed, on port 9090 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:9090``).

. Open the configuration file at [path]``/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`` and add the configuration block below. Make sure to replace `server.url` with your {productname} server URL and adjust `username` and `password` fields to match valid {productname} credentials.
+
----
# {productname} self-health metrics
scrape_configs:
- job_name: 'mgr-server'
  static_configs:
    - targets:
      - 'server.url:9100'  # Node exporter
      - 'server.url:9187'  # PostgreSQL exporter
      - 'server.url:5556'  # JMX exporter (Tomcat)
      - 'server.url:5557'  # JMX exporter (Taskomatic)
      - 'server.url:9800'  # Taskomatic
    - targets:
      - 'server.local :80'    # Message queue
      labels:
        __metrics_path__: /rhn/metrics

# Managed systems metrics:
- job_name: 'mgr-clients'
  uyuni_sd_configs:
   - host: "http://server.url"
     username: "admin"
     password: "admin"
----

> . Save the configuration file and restart the Prometheus service:

Reviewer: This is really two steps, I think.

Author: Yes, those are two distinct steps

+
----
systemctl restart prometheus
----

[NOTE]

> For more information about the Prometheus configuration options, see the official Prometheus documentation at https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====
For more information about the Prometheus configuration options, see the official Prometheus documentation at https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/.
====
```

Reviewer: Not sure this really needs to be in an admonition, could it just be a paragraph on its own?

Author: Can be a paragraph on its own, yes.

=== Install Grafana

If your monitoring server is a {productname} Salt client, you can install the Grafana package using the {productname} {webui}.
Otherwise you can download and install the package on your monitoring server manually.

.Procedure: Installing Grafana via {productname} {webui}

. In the {productname} {webui}, open the details page of the system where Grafana is to be installed, and navigate to the [guimenu]``Formulas`` tab.
. Check the [guimenu]``Grafana`` checkbox to enable  monitoring formulas, and click btn:[Save].
. Navigate to the ``Grafana`` tab in the top menu.
. In the ``Enable and configure Grafana`` section, enter the admin credentials you want to use to log in Grafana.
. On the ``Datasources`` section, make sure that the Prometheus URL field points to the system where Prometheus is running.
. Customize any other configuration options according to your needs. 
. Click btn:[Save Formula].
. Apply the highstate.

> . Once the highstate completes, check that the Grafana interface is loading correctly. In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Grafana is installed, on port 3000 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:3000``).

Reviewer: Same corrections on these two steps as for the Prometheus procedure ^^

[NOTE]

> {productname} provides pre-build dashboards for Server self-health, basic client monitoring, and more. In the formula configuration page, you can select which dashboards to provision in your Grafana setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====
{productname} provides pre-built dashboards for server self-health, basic client monitoring, and more. 
You can choose which dashboards to provision in the formula configuration page.
```

.Procedure: Manually installing Grafana

. Install the [package]``grafana`` package:
+
----
zypper in grafana
----
. Enable the Grafana service:
+
----
systemctl enable --now grafana-server
----
. Check that the Grafana interface is loading correctly.
In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Grafana is installed, on port 3000 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:3000``).

image::monitoring_grafana_example.png[scaledwidth=80%]

[NOTE]

> For more information on how to manually install and configure Grafana, see https://grafana.com/docs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====
For more information on how to manually install and configure Grafana, see https://grafana.com/docs.
====
```

Again, not sure this needs to be an admon.

== Configure {productname} Monitoring

> === Server Self Monitoring

Reviewer: Probably don't need this heading.

Author: Server self monitoring and monitoring client systems are independent topics. How to distinguish them otherwise?

Reviewer: You can leave them in if you put a sentence or two between them.

Author: Sentence added

> With {productname}{nbsp}4, you can enable the Server to expose Prometheus self-health metrics. Those metrics are made available by instrumentation of the Java application combined with Prometheus exporters. Together, they provide metrics about the underlying Hardware, Operating System and {productname} internals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With {productname}{nbsp}4, you can enable the server to expose Prometheus self-health metrics covering hardware, operating system and {productname} internals.
The metrics are made available by instrumentation of the Java application, combined with Prometheus exporters. 
```

These exporter packages are shipped with {productname} Server:

* Node exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-prometheus-node_exporter``.
See https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter.
* PostgreSQL exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-wrouesnel-postgres_exporter``.
See https://github.com/wrouesnel/postgres_exporter.
* JMX exporter: [systemitem]``prometheus-jmx_exporter``.
See https://github.com/prometheus/jmx_exporter.
* Apache exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-lusitaniae-apache_exporter``.
See https://github.com/Lusitaniae/apache_exporter.

These exporter packages are shipped with {productname} Proxy:

* Node exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-prometheus-node_exporter``.
See https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter.
* Squid exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-boynux-squid_exporter``.
See https://github.com/boynux/squid-exporter.

> The packages above are pre-installed in {productname} Server and Proxy, but their respective systemd daemons are disabled by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exporter packages are pre-installed in {productname} Server and Proxy, but their respective systemd daemons are disabled by default. 
```

> .Procedure: Enabling Self Monitoring for {productname}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Enabling Self Monitoring
```

. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Admin[Manager Configuration > Monitoring].
. Click btn:[Enable services].
. Restart Tomcat and Taskomatic.
. Navigate to the URL of your Prometheus server, on port 9090 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:9090``)

> . In the Prometheus UI, navigate to menu:[Status > Targets] and confirm that all the endpoints on the ``mgr-server`` group are up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the Prometheus UI, navigate to menu:[Status > Targets] and confirm that all the endpoints on the ``mgr-server`` group are active.
```
??

Author: 'Active' does not sound correct. Prometheus sorts the endpoints as 'Up' or 'Down' (and displays them like that in the UI). There is no concept of 'active'.

Reviewer: If `up` is used in the interface, then stick with it.

> . In case you have also installed Grafana via {productname} UI, the server insights will be visible on the {productname} Server dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you have also installed Grafana with the {webui}, the server insights will be visible on the {productname} Server dashboard.
```

image::monitoring_enable_services.png[scaledwidth=80%]

[IMPORTANT]

> Currently, only the Server self-health can be enabled via the UI. Exporters are available for the Proxy, have to be enabled manually, and the corresponding metrics are not automatically collected by Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====
Only server self-health monitoring can be enabled using the {webui}. 
Metrics for a proxy are not automatically collected by Prometheus.
To enable self-health monitoring on a proxy, you will need to manually install exporters and enable them.
====
```

=== Monitoring Managed Systems 

> Prometheus metrics exporters can be installed and configured on Salt clients via Formulas. The packages are available from the {productname} client tools channels, and can be enabled and configured directly in the {productname} {webui}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus metrics exporters can be installed and configured on Salt clients using formulas. 
The packages are available from the {productname} client tools channels, and can be enabled and configured directly in the {productname} {webui}.
```

> The following exporters can be installed on managed systems:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These exporters can be installed on managed systems:
```

* Node exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-prometheus-node_exporter``.
See https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter.
* PostgreSQL exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-wrouesnel-postgres_exporter``.
See https://github.com/wrouesnel/postgres_exporter.
* Apache exporter: [systemitem]``golang-github-lusitaniae-apache_exporter``.
See https://github.com/Lusitaniae/apache_exporter.

> When you have the exporters installed and configured, you can start using Prometheus to scrape metrics from monitored systems. If you have configured your monitoring server via {productname} {webui}, the metrics collection will happen automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have the exporters installed and configured, you can start using Prometheus to collect metrics from monitored systems. 
If you have configured your monitoring server with the {webui}, metrics collection will happen automatically.
```

> .Procedure: Configuring Prometheus Exporters on a System

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Configuring Prometheus Exporters on a Client
```

> . In the {productname} {webui}, open the details page of the system to be monitored, and navigate to the menu:Formulas tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the {productname} {webui}, open the details page of the client to be monitored, and navigate to the menu:Formulas tab.
```

. Check the [guimenu]``Enabled`` checkbox on the ``Prometheus Exporters`` formula.
. Click btn:[Save].
. Navigate to the menu:Formulas[Prometheus Exporters] tab.
. Select the exporters you want to enable and customize arguments according to your needs.
. Click btn:[Save Formula].
. Apply the highstate.

image::monitoring_configure_formula.png[scaledwidth=80%]

[NOTE]

> Monitoring formulas can also be configured for System Groups, by applying the same configuration used for individual systems inside the corresponding group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====
Monitoring formulas can also be configured for System Groups, by applying the same configuration used for individual systems inside the corresponding group.
====
```

. Once the highstate completes, check that the Grafana interface is loading correctly. In your browser, navigate to the URL of the server where Grafana is installed, on port 3000 (for example, [literal]``http://example.com:3000``).

[NOTE]
====
{productname} provides pre-built dashboards for server self-health, basic client monitoring, and more. 

> You can choose which dashboards to provision in the formula configuration page.

Reviewer: We've lost the closing `====`
